		#System Administration
		
#Task Automation and Scheduling Using Cron (crontab)

Cron is one of the most useful utilities when it comes to Linux Administration.It allows you to schedule commands or tasks(cron jobs) , at a specific time.
Cron runs as a daemon and is used to automate repetitive tasks like backups, monitoring disk space usage, updating the system with the latest application versions, sending e-mails, rotating logs , etc..
The word crontab has three different meanings: crontab command (used to manage cron jobs), crontab file (that contains the list of cron jobs) and cron tab entry format(refers to the syntax or structure used in crotab files).
- -
Crontab file:
The text file that contains the user's cron jobs is called the user's crontab.There is such a file for each user on Debian.The files are located in /var/spool/cron/crontabs.There is also a configuration file for the system wide cron jobs called crontab , located in /etc/.
There are two types of cronjobs: system-wide and individual user cron jobs.
Each user has a crontab file, which is short for cron table , where all scheduled cron jobs of that user are specified.These files are located in a subdirectory of /var/spool/cron.
As being text files, you can edit the crontab files by hand, using a text editor, even though they are not intended to be edited directly.It's recommended to use the crontab command instead.This will open the file using your preferred or default text editor and validate the file's structure on exit.

 crontab -l - to display the contents of the crontab file of the current user.
 crontab -e - to edit the current user's crontab file.choose the text editor and go forward.
 crontab -r - to remove your crontab file.
# m h  dom mon dow   command - this is the pattern of commands.m(minute), h(hours), dom(day of month), mon(month), dow(day of week).
Example: 0 6 * * * /root/backup.sh - means 0(minute) 6(hour ) *(empty dom) *(empty mon) *(empty dow ) /root/backup.sh(path to a bash script).Hour(is given in 24 hour time format, between 0 and 23), dow(day of week can be from 0 to 7 , where 0=7=sunday).
*(askterisk means empty) - Example: * * * * * /root/scrpit.sh - means every minute run the script.
,(comma) - Example: * 4,6,10 * * * /root/repeat.sh - means at 4, 6, 10 AMs run this script.
-(hyphen) - Example: * 9-17 * * 1-5 /root/jobs.sh - means from monday to friday at 9 till 17 AM run script.
/(slash) - Example: 10 4,21 */3 * * /root/task.sh - means every 3rd day of month, at 4:10 and 21:10 run script.

@(at case) Examples:
@yearly /root/task.sh - every first day of every year ,at midnight(00:00), once  run the script. 
@monthly /root/task.sh -  every first day of every month , at midnight , once run the script.
@weekly /root/task.sh - every first day of every week, at night, once run the script.
@daily /root/task.sh - every day , at midnight, once run the script.
@hourly /root/task.sh - every hour, at the beginning of the hour , once run the script.
@reboot /root/reboot.sh
*/2 * * * * date >> /tmp/date_and_time.txt - to run this command , every second minute.tail -f /var/log/syslog to see the logs of command execution.
/var/log/syslog is the cron log file on Debian.

Root can edit, list, remove other users' crontab using -u option and the username.So (sudo su -> crontab -e/-l /-r -u mrhacker)
Cron sets and uses its own environmental variables.!Use an absolute path for that command or the script to execute.
Root can also set some restrictions in regards to which users have access to their own crontab files.
*You can test cron jobs with "crontab-generator.org"  and "crotab.guru" by setting specific times and seeing their results for crontab file.
- -
*System-wide cron jobs

Besides the user's cron jobs , there are some system cron jobs that will be run as root.You just simply move your scripts into some directories: /etc/cron.d , cron.hourly, cron.weekly, cron.monthly, cron.yearly all in /etc directory.So all the scripts which are in those directories will be executed by their state of dirname 'e.g. yearly.d'.
less /etc/crontab - specifies when exactly will these cron jobs be run.For example, all scripts inside the cron.weekly directory, will be run on Sunday at 6:47 as mentioned in that file. 
Cron jobs are intended for servers or machines that are running continuously.If the system is down and the cron job is scheduled to run at that time, the task is lost.It will not be run when the machine starts.

-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -
#Scheduling Tasks Using anacron

Anacron is similar to cron, just that it's usually used on systems that are not up all the time, such as desktops or laptops.
Anacron does not expect the system to be running 24/7 like a server.When you want a background job to be executed automatically on a machine that is not always up, you should use anacron instead of cron.For example, if you have a backup script scheduled to run every day at 10PM AS A REGULAR CRON JOB , and if your laptop is not up at 10pm , your backup job will not be executed when the system starts.It is skipped until the next schedule.
However if you have the same job scheduled using ANACRON, you can be sure that it will be executed, once your laptop starts.If cron runs as a daemon, anacron is just a command that has to be run in order to execute the scheduled tasks.Anacron is run automatically each time the system starts.Anacron is run by root, so the tasks will have root privileges and the frequency of the job execution is expressed in days, not in minutes, like in the case of cron.
- -
Anacrontab

The file which specifies the anacron jobs is /etc/anacrontab.
Pattern: [period] [delay] [job-identifier] [command]

The option run-parts in /etc/anacrontab file, runs all the executable files found in a directory.
For example` 7  10  cron.weekly  run-parts  --report  /etc/cron.weekly - means that all executable files or scripts found in /etc/cron.weekly will be executed with a frequency of seven days.
There are 4 fields in anacron's jobs.In this example:
1st field) 7 - period in days after every job execution. 
2nd field) 10 - delay in minutes after system boot or manual job execution.Specifies how long anacron will wait before executing the job.The delay feature is intended to keep the system from being overloaded with lots of jobs, if anacron determines it needs to run several commands when it starts up.It won't run them simultaneously but with a delay.
3rd field) cron.weekly - job identifier(name).It should be unique for each job, and is the name of a file that will be created under /var/spool/anacron directory.This is called the job timestamp file and will contain a single line that indicates the last time when this job was executed.This identifier has also the purpose to identify the job, in the messages or the log files.
4th field) run-parts  --report  /etc/cron.weekly -  this is the command that will be executed.

Open the /etc/anacrontab by root in text editor.At the end we can add a new line, which is in fact a new job.
Write there:
2(which is for every second day)  1(which is for delay after boot or manual job execution)  backup(name of the job)   /root/backup.sh (script path of the job)
anacron -T - to test for syntax errors of anacron jobs before running it.
sudo anacron -d - manually runs anacron jobs.
The jobs of anacron are located in /var/spool/anacron directory.When we run 'cat jobname' it prints out the timestamp when that job was last time executed.So via this information it knows when to execute the next job.
__________________________________________________________________________
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
#Mounting and Unmounting File Systems (df, mount, unmount, fdisk, gparted)

If you want to access a file system that's on another partition or disk, you need to mount it or logically attach it to an existing directory of the unique file system.That directory is called mount point.
To mount or to attach a file system in the directory tree , use the 'mount' command.
mount - will display , all currently attached file systems.The output is really large because it includes virtual file systems such as sysfs, tmpf, proc and so on.
mount -l -t filesystem  - to display only the specific filesystems.-l(for list), -t(for type) e.g. mount -l -t ext4 or e.g. mount -l -t vfat (in linux called vfat for fat32 type)
- -
Insert a usb flash.It will automatically be inserted in /media with username of the user who's logged in, and another directory with the name of the USB stick.It also will be shown by running 'mount'.
In Linux, a storage device is logically represented as a special char device file in /dev.The file name can be found with 'mount command and with sudo fdisk -l.There are shown the file name of the new storage device.
sudo fdisk -l - shows the partitions and all storage devices as well.
dmesg - displays the kernel ring buffer, where also shown the logs of USB insertion.
lsblk - (stands for list block devices) which is another alternative for showing partitions list.
- -
Having the name of the device file we can mount it in any directory that already exists.
1.Lets create a new directory on the desktop mkdir /home/mrhacker/Desktop/usb
2. sudo mount /dev/sda1  /home/mrhacker/Desktop/usb - to mount the USB file to Desktop/usb directory.(ONLY ROOT CAN MOUNT)
!!You can mount the same physical device in different places.
!!Mount gives you live access to the contents of a device through the filesystem.But cp physically copies the data from one location to another.
now after mounting to another directory, we can run 'mount -t vfat -l' and it will show the two different locations of that device file.
The mount command will auto-detect the filesystem type.However some filesystems are not automatically recognized and they need to be explicitly specified.So use the -t option to specify the filesystem type.

sudo mount -o ro /dev/sda1 mountPoint - mounts as read only(ro).If there is mounted anywhere this filesystem , unmount from there and mount again as read only.so you can't modify that partition. 
sudo mount -o rw,remount /dev/sda1 mountPoint - If you realized that by mistake you have mounted it read only , you can remount it with other options as here rw(read write). 
- -
sudo umout mountPoint(here /home/mrhacker/Desktop/usb) - to unmount the device from destination directory.You are allowed to unmount partitions only if they are not used.So close any open files and then unmount.
Alternatively you could try a lazy unmount using the -l/--lazy option, so it will unmount a busy file system as soon as it's not busy anymore.
- -
Many downloadable OSes , including Windows and various Linux distributions , are distributed as ISO images.
To view the contents of an ISO image:
Start by creating the mount point at any location you want (e.g. mkdir ~/iso).
Then mount the image using the mount command and -o loop option.(sudo mount /pathtoISO /mountPoint -o loop)
- -
Gparted is a free partitioning editor , graphically managing your disk partitions.
__________________________________________________________________________
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
#Working With Device Files (dd)

dd - a command line utility which purpose is to convert and copy files.Compared to the 'cp' command, which is used to copy regular files and directories, the 'dd' command can be used to read and write from special device files.
!!Remember that hard disks are represented in Linux as special device files.
For example , in my case , the partition where the root directory is mounted is called nvme0n1p6, and is represented as a special file named nvme0n1p6 in the /dev directory.
So dd can work directly with these files and is used for tasks such as backing up the boot sector of a hard disk , cloning a disk or a partition to another one or creating a bootable usb stick.

*Note that sometimes dd humorously is called "Disk Distroyer", due to it's drive-erasing capabilities.
 So recommended to make backups of your data before using this tool.
 
 dd [option]=[value] - dd pattern.
 - - backup
 Lets backup or clone an entire partition to a file on another partition.RUN By ROOT
 dd if=/dev/usbdir of=/home/mrhacker/backup-usb.img status=progress - if(input file), of(output file)
 As even the usb stick can be empty , however dd command will copy everything both empy and occupied space.So if you have a partition of 10 Gigabytes and the 9 are free, the dd command will copy 10 Gigabytes to the destination.This is one of the main differences from the 'cp' command.

- - recover 
And when you want to restore the disc using the image file, you just use the image file as the input and the disk or partition as the destination. dd if=/home/mrhacker/backup-usb.img of=/dev/usbdir status=progress
-
dd if=/home/mrhacker/backup-usb.img of=/dev/usbdir status=progress conv=sync - to copy everything using synchronized input-output.

- - cloning entire partition into usb stick
With dd command you can clone the entire hard disk or just a partition.Of course the destination partition should be at least the same size as the source partition for this to work.
dd if=/dev/nvme0n1p6 of=/dev/usbstick status=progress

- - MBR backup and recovery using dd
MBR(Master Boot Record) is a special type of boot sector at the very beginning of the disk.It contains two main things: 1. Bootloader - code to start the operation system. 2.Partition Table - info about how the disk is divided into partitions.So the MBR represents the first sector of the disk with the size of 512bytes.
By default , the dd command reads one block of input processes it and writes it to an output file.You can specify the block size using the bs option.

dd if=/dev/sda of=/root/mbr.dat bs=512 count=1 (/dev/sda is disk not partition, bs is block size by bytes , count specifies the count of blocks to be copied)
This command will copy the first 512bytes of /dev/sda(your disk, not partition) and save it to a file called mbr.dat in the /root/ directory for BACKUP purpose.

MBR backup importance:
1.If the MBR is corrupted or lost, the system might fail to boot because it can't find the bootloader or the partition table to know where the OS is installed.
2.Without the partition table, the system won't know how to find or organize your partitions.
3.If you don't have a backup of the MBR and the partition table is lost, it can be very hard to recover the data.
The operating system might not be able to recognize the partition structure, and tools to recover the data might be more complicated or require advanced methods.

 dd if=/root/mbr.dat of=/dev/sda bs=512 count=1 (recover mbr from /root/mbr.dat if MBR will be corrupted).
 
 - - make USB drive bootable
 At first the usb stick should be formatted with a file system.On most Linux distributions the USB flash drives are automatically mounted when inserted.
1.sudo umount /media/mrhacker/XBOOT - unmount the disk if it's mounted.
2.sudo mkfs.filesystem(e.g mkfs.vfat) /dev/pathtodevicefile(/dev/sda1) - formatting the drive to specified filesystem.
3.dd if=/home/mrhacker/isoimagepath of=/dev/sda1 bs=4M status=progress - will make usb stick as bootable.4Megabytes is used to get balanced speed and memory usage while processing. 
__________________________________________________________________________
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
#Getting System Hardware Information (lshw, lscpu, lspci, dmidecode, hdparm)

The reasons we need to get information about system hardware:
*If you want to upgrade your system hardware or want to find out why some applications don't run as smoothly as we expect.In VMs, hardware-checking commands show virtual hardware seen by the guest OS, not the host's real hardware.
!Run these commands as ROOT

*lshw - list hardware.extracts information on the hardware configuration of the machine.It can report the exact memory configuration , the firmware version, mainboard configuration, CPU version and speed, case configuration, BUS speed and many more.Run with piping to 'less' or redirect the output to a file , because it has a lot of data.lshw -json/-html (to display in json or html format).lshw -short - to display in short tabular format.
JSON is a data exchange format used to exchange data between different applications and programming languages.
lshw -C classname(e.g. cpu) - to display only specific information.
*inxi -Fx -  displays information about all harder elements.

--CPU info
lscpu - displays information about the central processor unit and the architecture.-J option to display in json format.

--RAM info
dmidecode -t memory - get only information about the RAM memory.this command lists information about the RAM memory installed on the system.It's not displaying information about the amount of free or used memory of the running system.But you can always run top or free -m to see the amount of memory used or free.

--PCI info
lspci - to list all the pci buses and details about the devices connected to them like the vga adapter, the graphic card, network adapter, usb ports, sata controllers and so on.

--USB info
lsusb - to list the USB controllers and details about the devices connected to them.-v (verbose) to display detailed information about each USB port.

--DISK info
lshw -C disk - to display only the disk section with lshw command as shown below.-short better.
lsblk - also displays information about disks and partitions.
To get MORE information , including size, filesystem type, the number of sectors and so on , run fdisk -l diskname(optional).
hdparm -i drivename - to get or set SATA drive parameters, e.g. to get details about the specific SATA drive.Use capital -I instead of -i ,to display more information.hdparm can also be used to benchmark or check the performance of hard disks in Linux.For example
hdparm -t --direct /dev/diskname - to do timing test.

--WIRELESS info
iw list - to list and manipulate wireless devices and their configurations.

--BATTERY info
acpi - This is useful if you are connected with ssh to a remote laptop and want to check if it works on battery or is connected to the AC power source.By default it is not installed on Ubuntu or Kali , so you need to install it 'sudo apt install acpi'.
acpi -bi - to display battery health as well.
acpi -V - do display everything that can be shown about battery.

- - -
Most of the commands that we used so far , get the information from the files inside /proc directory , which is a virtual file system.To get specific information about e.g. cpu -> cat /proc/cpuinfo, e.g. memory -> cat /proc/meminfo, or e.g. kernel version -> cat /proc/version which gets displayed with 'uname' command as well.
- - -
__________________________________________________________________________
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
#Systemd

Most modern Linux distributions are using systemd as the default init system and service manager.
Systemd has replaced the old SysVInit script system.However its backward compatible with the old SysVInit.
Systemd (System Management Daemon) is a Linux initialization system and service manager with many components such as on demand service management, logging, boot manager and many more.
An init system is the first process that starts when Linux boots up (after the kernel is loaded).
It is Linux initialization system doing it's boot and startup process.
The Linux boot process has the following phases:
System powers up, then the bootloader which is GRUB loads the kernel, then the kernel loads an initial RAM disk that loads the system drives and looks for the root file system.Once the kernel is set up, it begins the systemd initialization with PID 1 as the first process, then takes over and continues to mount the host file systems and starts services. 

Compared to the old init, which started the services sequentially, systemd starts the services in parallel.
systemctl --version - to display the version of systemd.
systemd-analyze - to show how long the boot process took.
systemd-analyze blame - to list all running units ordered by the time they took to initialize.

Systemd introduces the concepts of System units and there are several types, such as a service unit, mount unit, socket unit , and slice unit.Units are defined in unit configuration files, which include information about the unit type and it's behavior.
For service management tasks , the unit file contains instructions about how to start, stop or restart the service.The unit has the suffix ".service".

- - - Service Management
systemctl - To control the systemd system and service manager. RUN all BY ROOT.
For example install nginx server
systemctl status nginx.service - to display the service state and the first few log lines.Systemd is smart enough to know that you probably want to operate on a service and you can leave off that .service suffix, so run 'systemctl status nginx' without .service.
systemctl start/stop/restart servicename - to start , stop and restart a service.You need restart option for applying changes , made in service configuration files.
systemctl reload servicename - to reload service.Some applications are able to reload configuration files without restarting whole service.
systemctl reload-or-restart servicename - if you are unsure that application can reload or need restart for applying configuration run this command which will choose choose reload if it is available or restart, if not.
systemctl enable/disable servicename - to enable/disable the service for starting at boot time.
systemctl is-enabled servicename - to check if enabled or disabled.
systemctl mask servicename- to prevent the service from being started automatically or manually.Now when you will see the state of service (systemctl status servicename) , in Loaded section it shows "masked".
systemctl unmask servicename - to allow again the service to be modified.
systemctl list-units - to list all the active units the systemd knows about.
systemctl list-units --all - to list all the active and inactive units the system knows about.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
